Sam Harris on the Science of Good and Evil (23:44~30:41)
Notice that no one is ever tempted to attack the philosophical foundations of medicine, with worries like, “Who are you to say that not always vomiting is healthy? What if you meet a person who wants to vomit and in fact vomit until he dies? How are you going to convince him that he’s not healthy as you are?” The very notion of health, has certain values built into it. This does not make the field of medicine unscientific. And talking about morality human values, I actually think we are talking about mental health, and the health of societies. So I think the analogy does run rather deep. But the truth is even deeper than that, that science has always been in the value’s business. You simply cannot speak about facts, without embracing certain values. It’s not that you can’t get an odd from an is, you can’t get an is without certain odds. Consider the simplest statement of the scientific fact: water is two parts hydrogen and one part oxygen. This is value-free and utterances human being ever made. But, what do we do when someone doubts the truth of this utterance? All we can do, is appeal to scientific values. We must appeal to the value of understanding the world. We must appeal to the value of evidence - in this case, nearly 200 years of experimental evidence in chemistry. We must appeal to the logical consistency. Much of what we presupposed to be true about the world depends upon the polarity of our belief about the structure of water. What can we say to a person who doesn’t share this values? What if we meet someone who says, “Listen, that’s just not how I choose to think about water.”? Someone could say, “I’m a biblical chemist, and I read in Genesis 1, the God created water before he created light. I take that to me that water before he created the stars, so there would’ve been no stars to fuse hydrogen and helium into heavier elements like oxygen - so there will be no oxygen to put in the water. Or God created special oxygen, but I don’t think he would do that cause that would be biblically inelegant.” What can we do in such a conversation? All we can do is appeal the values - scientific values. And if the person doesn’t share those values, the conversation is over! If someone doesn’t value evidence, what evidence are you going to put forward, to show that they should value it? If someone doesn’t value logic, what logical argument are you going to make that will prove the value of logic? I think the split between facts and values just should strange to you on its face. What are we really saying, when we say that science can be applied to questions of right and wrong and good and evil? We’re saying that when we make every effort to get our personal biases out of the way, when we become most reliant on clear reasoning and honest observation. When intellectual honesty is at its zenith, well then most efforts have no application whatsoever at the most important questions of human life. That’s precisely the mood you cannot be in to answer the most important questions of human life. It’ll be very strange if that we’re so. Now, thinking about moral truth in the context of science, only poses a problem for you if you imagine that science of morality must be absolutely self-justifying in a way that no branch of science can be. Every science must presuppose certain core values that does not render science unscientific, and if science is unscientific: what is scientific? A science of morality predicated on the value of well-being, will be a no weaker ?  than medicine predicated on the value of health - or indeed, any other branch of science predicated on a value of certain ? assumptions. And justice is possible to be cognitively closed, to certain truths about the physical universe. It’s possible to be closed or to harbor value judgements that close you to certain possibilities of human experience. It’s possible to value the wrong things. If you think that you prefer to be neurotic and in pain and alienated from all of humanity and capable of creative work, if you think that you would rather live in society where millions of people suffer needlessly, there is something wrong with you. Ok, objectively wrong? Yes. The state of your brain prevents you from wanting, or even knowing about certain higher state of consciousness. Higher with respect to what? Higher as being further from lowest possible state of consciousness - the worst possible misery for everyone. Is the worst possible misery for everyone really bad? Again, I submit to you that we’ve hit philosophical bedrock with the shovel of a stupid question. Now, of course there are many good questions that people want to ask, that relate to how science and morality could work in practice. How do you balance one person’s well-being, against the well-being of society? What do we do when certain values are in opposition to one another - certain obvious goods like freedom of speech verses the right to privacy? How can we evaluate the consequences of certain actions, because the consequences seem to go on forever? So, ask yourself. There’s recent tragedy in Japan with the nuclear reactor. Was that good or bad? Well, it certainly seems bad, but what if this causes us to be so much more scrupulous with nuclear materials and we would otherwise have been we wind up saving millions and millions of lives down the line of century has. These are all good questions, and we cannot help but grapple with these questions in our efforts to build the buyable global civilization based on shared values. But none of these are ? to that the case from moral truth I’m making. In every domain that truth exists, there’re an infinite number of questions that we just can’t answer. So, my favorite at the moment is, how many birds are in flight over the surface of the earth at this instant.
(Original Source: https://soundcloud.com/intelligence2/sam-harris-on-the-science-of-good-and-evil)


